feat(tutorials): add C++ casino number guessing game tutorial (#7914)
jenkins-infra/jenkins.io: content/doc/tutorials/build-a-cpp-app-with-jenkins.adoc

Now, log in using the `admin` username and `admin` password.

=== Create your Pipeline project in Jenkins

. In Jenkins, select *New Item* under *Dashboard >* at the top left.
. Enter your new Pipeline project name, such as `casino-number-guessing-game`, in *Enter an item name*.
. Scroll down if necessary and select *Pipeline*, then select *OK* at the end of the page.
. (Optional) Enter a Pipeline *Description*.
. Select *Pipeline* on the left pane.
. Select *Definition* and then choose the *Pipeline script from SCM* option. This option instructs Jenkins to obtain your Pipeline from the source control management (SCM), which is your forked Git repository.
. Choose *Git* from the options in *SCM*.
. Enter the URL of your repository in *Repositories/Repository URL*. This URL can be found when selecting the green *Code* button in the main page of your GitHub repo.

> . Set the script path to `Jenkinsfile`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. In _Branches to build_, enter `*/main`
. In _Script Path_, set the script path to `Jenkinsfile`.
```

. Select *Save* at the end of the page. You're now ready to create a `Jenkinsfile` to check into your locally cloned Git repository.

=== Create your initial Pipeline as a Jenkinsfile

You're now ready to create your Pipeline that will automate building your C++ application in Jenkins. Your Pipeline is created as a `Jenkinsfile`, which is committed to your locally cloned Git repository (`casino-number-guessing-game`).

This is the foundation of "Pipeline-as-Code", which treats the continuous delivery pipeline as a part of the application to be versioned and reviewed like any other code. Read more about Pipeline and what a Jenkinsfile is in the link:/doc/book/pipeline[Pipeline] and link:/doc/book/pipeline/jenkinsfile[Using a Jenkinsfile] sections of the User Handbook.

> First, create an initial Pipeline to download a C++ Docker image and run it as a Docker container (which will build your C++ application). Also add a "Build" stage to the Pipeline that begins orchestrating this whole process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, create an initial Pipeline to build your C++ application. Add a "Build" stage to the Pipeline that begins orchestrating this whole process.
```

> . Using your favorite text editor or IDE, create and save a new text file with the name `Jenkinsfile` at the root of your local `casino-number-guessing-game` Git repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. As you forked our sample repo, you already have an empty `Jenkinsfile`.
```

. Copy the following Declarative Pipeline code and paste it into your empty `Jenkinsfile`:
+
[source,groovy,subs="attributes+"]
----
pipeline {
    agent any
    stages {
        stage('Build') {
            steps {
                sh 'rm -rf build'
                sh 'cmake -B build -S .'
                sh 'cmake --build build'
            }
        }
    }
}
----
The above defines a link:/doc/book/pipeline/syntax/#stage[`stage`] (directive) called `Build` that appears on the Jenkins UI.
This link:/doc/pipeline/steps/workflow-durable-task-step/#code-sh-code-shell-script[`sh`] step executes the `cmake` command to build your C++ application.

. Save your edited `Jenkinsfile` and commit it to your local `casino-number-guessing-game` Git repository. Within the `casino-number-guessing-game` directory, run the commands: +

>   `git add .` +

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  `git add Jenkinsfile` +
```

  then +
  `git commit -m "Add initial Jenkinsfile"` +
  and finally +
  `git push` to push your changes to your forked repository on GitHub, so it can be picked up by Jenkins.

. Now select *Build Now* on the left pane of your Pipeline project in Jenkins. After making a clone of your local `casino-number-guessing-game` Git repository itself, Jenkins:

. Initially queues the project to be run on the agent.
. Runs the `Build` stage defined in the `Jenkinsfile` on the agent.

> During this time, CMake downloads and configures the necessary build files for your C++ application. You can now select *#1* to see the details of the build. You will then see how much time the build took waiting in the queue, and how much time it took to run.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During this time, CMake configures the necessary build files for your C++ application, builds and links your application.
You can now select *#1* to see the details of the build. You will then see how much time the build took waiting in the queue, and how much time it took to run.
```

=== Add a final deliver stage to your Pipeline

. Go back to your text editor/IDE and ensure your `Jenkinsfile` is open.
. Copy and paste the following Declarative Pipeline syntax immediately under the `Test` stage of your `Jenkinsfile`:
+
[source,groovy]
----
        stage('Deliver') {
            steps {
                sh 'tar -czf casino_game.tar.gz build/casino_game'
                archiveArtifacts artifacts: 'casino_game.tar.gz', fingerprint: true
            }
        }
----
so that you end up with:
+
[source,groovy]
----
pipeline {
    agent any
    stages {
        stage('Build') {
            steps {
                sh 'rm -rf build'
                sh 'cmake -B build -S .'
                sh 'cmake --build build'
            }
        }
        stage('Test') {
            steps {
                sh './build/casino_game'
                sh './build/test_game'
            }
        }
        stage('Deliver') {
            steps {
                sh 'tar -czf casino_game.tar.gz build/casino_game'
                archiveArtifacts artifacts: 'casino_game.tar.gz', fingerprint: true
            }
        }
    }
}
----

> Defines a new stage called `Deliver` that appears on the Jenkins UI.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The above defines a new stage called `Deliver` that appears on the Jenkins UI.
```

This link:/doc/pipeline/steps/workflow-durable-task-step/#code-sh-code-shell-script[`sh`] step packages the executable into a `.tar.gz` file.
This link:/doc/pipeline/steps/workflow-durable-task-step/#code-archiveartifacts-code-archive-the-artifacts[`archiveArtifacts`] step archives the `.tar.gz` file as a build artifact.

. Save your edited `Jenkinsfile` and commit it to your local `casino-number-guessing-game` Git repository. Within the `casino-number-guessing-game` directory, run the commands: +

>   `git add .` +

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  `git add Jenkinsfile` +
```

This is the foundation of "Pipeline-as-Code", which treats the continuous delivery pipeline as a part of the application to be versioned and reviewed like any other code. Read more about Pipeline and what a Jenkinsfile is in the link:/doc/book/pipeline[Pipeline] and link:/doc/book/pipeline/jenkinsfile[Using a Jenkinsfile] sections of the User Handbook.

First, create an initial Pipeline to build your C++ application. Add a "Build" stage to the Pipeline that begins orchestrating this whole process.

. As you forked our sample repo, you already have an empty `Jenkinsfile`.
. Copy the following Declarative Pipeline code and paste it into your empty `Jenkinsfile`:
+
[source,groovy,subs="attributes+"]
----
pipeline {
    agent any
    stages {
        stage('Build') {
            steps {
                sh 'rm -rf build'
                sh 'cmake -B build -S .'
                sh 'cmake --build build'
            }
        }
    }
}
----
The above defines a link:/doc/book/pipeline/syntax/#stage[`stage`] (directive) called `Build` that appears on the Jenkins UI.

> This link:/doc/pipeline/steps/workflow-durable-task-step/#code-sh-code-shell-script[`sh`] step executes the `cmake` command to build your C++ application.

Author: Hi @kmartens27  , I guess those symbols somehow disturbs the ci checks as in my initial commit it did create problems . So I fear of implementing this suggestion . What you believe??

[.boxshadow]
image:tutorials/cpp/pipeline-console-build-stage.png[alt="Build stage",width=100%]

You can now select *casino-number-guessing-game* (if that's the name you chose for your pipeline) on the top left to return to your pipeline main page.

=== Add a test stage to your Pipeline

. Go back to your text editor/IDE and ensure your `Jenkinsfile` is open.
. Copy and paste the following Declarative Pipeline syntax immediately under the `Build` stage:
+
[source,groovy]
----
        stage('Test') {
            steps {
                sh './build/casino_game'
                sh './build/test_game'
            }
        }
----
so that you end up with:
+
[source,groovy]
----
pipeline {
    agent any
    stages {
        stage('Build') {
            steps {
                sh 'rm -rf build'
                sh 'cmake -B build -S .'
                sh 'cmake --build build'
            }
        }
        stage('Test') {
            steps {
                sh './build/casino_game'
                sh './build/test_game'
            }
        }
    }
}
----
The above defines a link:/doc/book/pipeline/syntax/#stage[`stage`] (directive) called `Test` that appears on the Jenkins UI.

> This link:/doc/pipeline/steps/workflow-durable-task-step/#code-sh-code-shell-script[`sh`] step runs the game and unit tests to ensure the application works as expected.

Author: same point here I want to put . Those symbols somehow disturbs the ci checks as in my initial commit it did create problems . So I fear of implementing this suggestion .

> This link:/doc/pipeline/steps/workflow-durable-task-step/#code-sh-code-shell-script[`sh`] step runs the game and unit tests to ensure the application works as expected.

Author: Thanks so much for the explanation about this .Much appreciated . I misinterpreted it . Sorry from my side . Now I got to know where the issue lied . 

Let me try to implement them now .

+
[source,groovy]
----
        stage('Deliver') {
            steps {
                sh 'tar -czf casino_game.tar.gz build/casino_game'
                archiveArtifacts artifacts: 'casino_game.tar.gz', fingerprint: true
            }
        }
----
so that you will end up with:
+
[source,groovy]
----
pipeline {
    agent any
    stages {
        stage('Build') {
            steps {
                sh 'rm -rf build'
                sh 'cmake -B build -S .'
                sh 'cmake --build build'
            }
        }
        stage('Test') {
            steps {
                sh './build/casino_game'
                sh './build/test_game'
            }
        }
        stage('Deliver') {
            steps {
                sh 'tar -czf casino_game.tar.gz build/casino_game'
                archiveArtifacts artifacts: 'casino_game.tar.gz', fingerprint: true
            }
        }
    }
}
----
The above defines a new stage called `Deliver` that appears on the Jenkins UI.
This link:/doc/pipeline/steps/workflow-durable-task-step/#code-sh-code-shell-script[`sh`] step packages the executable into a `.tar.gz` file.

> This link:/doc/pipeline/steps/workflow-durable-task-step/#code-archiveartifacts-code-archive-the-artifacts[`archiveArtifacts`] step archives the `.tar.gz` file as a build artifact.

Author: same point here I want to put too again like those two previous . Those symbols somehow disturbs the ci checks as in my initial commit it did create problems . So I fear of implementing this suggestion .

. Save your edited `Jenkinsfile` and commit it to your local `casino-number-guessing-game` Git repository. Within the `casino-number-guessing-game` directory, run the commands: +
  `git add Jenkinsfile` +
  then +
  `git commit -m "Add 'Deliver' stage"` +
  and finally +
  `git push` to push your changes to your forked repository on GitHub, so it can be picked up by Jenkins.

. In Jenkins, sign in if necessary, go back to the *Dashboard* and then navigate to *casino-number-guessing-game*. Alternatively, you can go directly to *casino-number-guessing-game* depending on where you're starting from.
. Select *Build Now* on the left. You should see after a while a new column *Deliver* appear in the *Stage View*.

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
+
```
Adding a `+` will keep everything in line with the previous steps instead of starting new steps each time.

[.boxshadow]
image:tutorials/cpp/deliver-overview.png[alt="Deliver stage",width=100%]

> . Select *#3* or on the number representing your last build on the left, under *Build History*. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Select *#3*, or on the number representing your last build on the left, under *Build History*. 
```
Remove numbered step as it is not part of the step-by-step instructions, add comma to include text better.

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
+
```
Same as above, keeps everything in line with following steps.

[.boxshadow]
image:tutorials/cpp/deliver-overview-status.png[alt="Deliver stage",width=100%]

. Select *Pipeline Overview* to see the stages of the Pipeline.

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
+
```
Same as above, keep everything in line with following steps.

[.boxshadow]
image:tutorials/cpp/pipeline-overview-deliver-stage.png[alt="Pipeline overview with Deliver stage",width=100%]

. Select the *Deliver* stage. You will then see a green part displaying *tar -czf casino_game.tar.gz build/casino_game*, which represents the successful execution of the `tar` command.

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
+
```
Same as above, keep everything in line with previous steps.

[.boxshadow]
image:tutorials/cpp/pipeline-console-deliver-stage.png[alt="Deliver stage output",width=100%]

. You can see the full stage view by clicking on the "Full Stage View" in the left menu.

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
+
```
Same as above, keep everything in line with previous steps.

  `git add Jenkinsfile` +
  then +
  `git commit -m "Add 'Test' stage"` +
  and finally +
  `git push` to push your changes to your forked repository on GitHub, so it can be picked up by Jenkins.

. In Jenkins, go back to your *Dashboard* if necessary, then select *casino-number-guessing-game* and launch another build thanks to *Build Now*.
. After a while, a new column titled *Test* will appear in the *Stage View*.

[.boxshadow]
image:tutorials/cpp/test-stage-overview.png[alt="Test stage",width=100%]

You can select *#2*, or on the number representing your last build on the left, under *Build History* to see the details of the build.

[.boxshadow]
image:tutorials/cpp/test-stage-status.png[alt="Test stage",width=100%]

You can now select *Pipeline Overview* to see the stages of the Pipeline.

[.boxshadow]
image:tutorials/cpp/pipeline-overview-test-stage.png[alt="Pipeline overview with Test stage",width=100%]

The newly added "Test" stage is visible here. Selecting the "Test" stage checkmark displays the stage output.

[.boxshadow]
image:tutorials/cpp/pipeline-output-test-stage.png[alt="Test stage output",width=100%]

> ==== Viewing the Results

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
==== Viewing the results
```
Suggestion to use sentence casing (only beginning of header and any propper nouns).

> During the **Test** stage, the `casino_game` executable will run and display output similar to the following in the Jenkins console:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
During the **Test** stage, the `casino_game` executable runs and displays output similar to the following in the Jenkins console:
```
Suggestion to use present/active voice.

> [source,bash]
> ----
> Welcome to the Casino Number Guessing Game!
> Running in non-interactive mode. Using default values.
> Generated random number: 8
> Generated random number: 4
> Generated number: 4
> Wrong guess! Try again.
> Wrong guess! Try again.
> Wrong guess! Try again.
> Wrong guess! Try again.
> Wrong guess! Try again.
> Wrong guess! Try again.
> Wrong guess! Try again.
> Wrong guess! Try again.
> Wrong guess! Try again.
> Wrong guess! Try again.
> Wrong guess! Try again.
> Wrong guess! Try again.
> Wrong guess! Try again.
> Wrong guess! Try again.
> Wrong guess! Try again.
> Wrong guess! Try again.
> Wrong guess! Try again.
> Congratulations! You guessed the number!
> You won $5!
> Total winnings: $5
> ----
> 
> This output confirms that the application is working as expected. Here’s what each part of the output means:
> 
> - **`Generated random number`**: This line shows the random number generated by the game. In non-interactive mode, the game generates multiple random numbers to simulate guesses until it finds the correct one.
> - **`Generated number`**: This is the secret number the game is trying to guess.
> - **`Wrong guess! Try again.`**: This indicates that the game made an incorrect guess. In non-interactive mode, the game will continue guessing until it finds the correct number.
> - **`Congratulations! You guessed the number!`**: This indicates that the game successfully guessed the correct number.
> - **`You won $5!`**: This shows the prize awarded based on the number of attempts and the difficulty level.
> - **`Total winnings: $5`**: This displays the total winnings accumulated during the game.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[source,bash]
----
Welcome to the Casino Number Guessing Game!
Running in non-interactive mode. Using default values.
Generated random number: 8 // <1>
Generated random number: 4
Generated number: 4 // <2>
Wrong guess! Try again. // <3>
Wrong guess! Try again.
Wrong guess! Try again.
Wrong guess! Try again.
Wrong guess! Try again.
Wrong guess! Try again.
Wrong guess! Try again.
Wrong guess! Try again.
Wrong guess! Try again.
Wrong guess! Try again.
Wrong guess! Try again.
Wrong guess! Try again.
Wrong guess! Try again.
Wrong guess! Try again.
Wrong guess! Try again.
Wrong guess! Try again.
Wrong guess! Try again.
Congratulations! You guessed the number! // <4>
You won $5! // <5>
Total winnings: $5 // <6>
----

This output confirms that the application is working as expected. Here’s what each part of the output means:

<1> **`Generated random number`**: This line shows the random number generated by the game. In non-interactive mode, the game generates multiple random numbers to simulate guesses until it finds the correct one.
<2> **`Generated number`**: This is the secret number the game is trying to guess.
<3> **`Wrong guess! Try again.`**: This indicates that the game made an incorrect guess. In non-interactive mode, the game continues guessing until it finds the correct number.
<4> **`Congratulations! You guessed the number!`**: This indicates that the game successfully guessed the correct number.
<5> **`You won $5!`**: This shows the prize awarded based on the number of attempts and the difficulty level.
<6> **`Total winnings: $5`**: This displays the total winnings accumulated during the game.
```
Suggestion to add callouts to this block, tested in my local clone and the site does build with the callouts as expected. Small text suggestion as well.

> The `test_game` executable will also run during the **Test** stage and display output similar to the following:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `test_game` executable also runs during the **Test** stage and display output similar to the following:
```
Suggestion to use active voice.

[source,bash]
----
Generated random number: 8
Generated random number: 4
Generated random number: 3
All tests passed!
----

This output confirms that the unit tests for the game logic have passed successfully.

> For reference , here is how the output will look like : 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For reference, this is an example of how the output renders: 
```
Suggestion to use present voice.
